# Identifying service bottlenecks in public bikesharing flow networks 

Da Lei ${ }^{\mathrm{a}, \mathrm{b}}$, Long Cheng ${ }^{\mathrm{a}, \mathrm{b}, \mathrm{c}}$, Pengfei Wang ${ }^{\mathrm{a}, \mathrm{b}}$, Xuewu Chen ${ }^{\mathrm{a}, \mathrm{b}}$, Lin Zhang ${ }^{\mathrm{a}}$<br>${ }^{a}$ Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Urban ITS, School of Transportation, Southeast University, China<br>${ }^{\mathrm{b}}$ Laboratory of Transport Industry of Comprehensive Transportation Theory (Nanjing Modern Multimodal Transportation Laboratory), China

A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Resilient public transport
Role extraction
Smart card data
Network dynamics
Bikesharing flow patterns

## A B S T R A C T

Service bottlenecks are a key barrier to building a resilient public transport system. In this paper, we propose a new approach to automatically extract the role of a station in dynamical public transport flow networks based on the emerging role discovery method in network science. The term "role" in this study refers to the distinctive position or function that a station plays within the public transport flow network. Using smart card data from Nanjing public bikesharing agencies, we first construct dynamical public transport flow networks with notions of dynamical graph and edge. We then develop a dynamical algorithm to recursively compute the structural flow characteristics of nodes in passenger flow networks. Non-negative Matrix Factorization is conducted to extract the role memberships from the derived structural feature matrix and interpret each role in terms of measurements with practical values. The network hubs and potential service bottlenecks are then identified based on their operating characteristics and dynamics. Furthermore, the day-to-day and within-day role dynamics of public transport stations over time are unveiled. The results contribute to a better understanding of the interplay between stations in the network, and the identification of roles provides insight for public transport agencies to improve service resilience.

## 1. Introduction

Understanding the dynamics of public transport networks is important for identifying service bottlenecks and improving system resilience (Wang et al., 2020). With the rapid development of urbanization and technology, exploring the dynamics of public transport networks has become challenging due to their increasing size and complexity, along with our greater access to large-scale automatically-collected data sources such as smart card (SC) data (Wang et al., 2017). Network science, with its abstraction power, provides a quantitative framework for analyzing collective dynamics and interactions among network components in various disciplines, including transport systems. Specifically, graph theory has been instrumental in understanding transport networks, allowing for the study of topological structures, flow dynamics, and path relationships within these systems (Cheng et al., 2020a; Teixeira and Derudder, 2021; Chen et al., 2022a). Studies have used graph theory to analyze public transport networks by examining their topological stability (Derrible and Kennedy, 2011), robustness against perturbations (Builes-Jaramillo and Lotero, 2022), and community structure (Chen et al., 2022b). These works have laid the groundwork for our paper, in which we apply emerging role discovery techniques
from network science to investigate the dynamic roles of stations within public bikesharing networks. However, most existing studies focused only on investigating the topological complexity of public transport networks without providing in-depth insights into the attributes of public transport systems. This has led to claims from transport scientists that these works make only limited contributions to our understanding of the dynamics of public transport networks (see a detailed discussion in Luo et al. (2019)). Furthermore, most of the existing literature on the application of network science to public transport systems examines the time-varying network characteristics at a long granularity of time, resulting in growing concerns about the utility of network sciences in capturing the day-to-day and within-day dynamical network performance (Leng et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2015; Zhu and Luo, 2016; Cats, 2017).

In the field of public transport research, exploring spatial-temporal travel behavior (or passenger flow pattern) has been a focus for decades. One class of these studies relied on conventional travel survey data (Joh et al., 2002; Suslio and Kitamura, 2005). For a detailed discussion of the main drawbacks of applying travel survey data to analyze travel behavior, we refer to Tao et al. (2014). Given the increasing availability of automatically-collected data sources like smart card (SC)

[^0]
[^0]:    a Corresponding author at: Sipailou 2, Nanjing 210096, China.
    E-mail address: longcheng@seu.edu.cn (L. Cheng).

---

*Generated by Mistral OCR App | by Lei Da (David) | greatradar@gmail.com*